something about him touched hurts all
over the world people who didn't know
where India was didn't know what the
issues were there was something about
him to touch their lives he was a man of
many faces he had this tremendous of
assistance for children and very
mischievous and could this very it's
also disrespectful to say naughty or
wicked leader of one-fifth the world's
people he had extraordinary capacity to
talk to this massive crowd on a
one-to-one basis I think everybody
sitting there thought the Gandhiji was
talking to him
playful father and friend
in some of the caricature they made him
look like a monkey in grandpa loggers to
laugh at that sometimes joke and say the
other monkey and coming in now
inspiration to future generations
the man indeed fever nan one difficult
to declare it unless you have some from
conviction rebel for a Just Cause
says yes we will go to prison we will
take a vow to God that we will go to
prison and we will stay there until this
war withdraw and willing martyr for his
country and even safety one of his
associates that I should die at the end
of a recession and when I do please
remember that if I accept that bullet
courageously with the name of God on my
lips only then believe that I will occur
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
there is an unalterable law governing
everything and every being that exists
or lives I may not be like the law or
the lawgiver because I know so little
about it for him God to be God must rule
the heart and transform it it is proved
in the transformed conduct and character
of those who have felt the real presence
of God with him born into an ancient and
mystical land
Mohandas K Gandhi saw his life as a
search for ultimate truths constantly
evolving seeking alternate ways of
thinking and living
he called his autobiography the story of
my experiments with truth his long
journey of self transformation began in
Indian port city of poor bender
from his earliest days Gandhi was
stirred by a role model of extraordinary
discipline and devotion deeply religious
his mother was given to frequent and
extended episodes of fasting once in the
rainy season she vowed not to eat until
the Sun shone poor Gandhi and the other
members of the family would constantly
be looking out of the window because
they wanted their mother to eat because
she was starving and she said don't
worry about me I'm perfectly fine if God
doesn't want me to eat today
I shan't eat Gandhi revered his mother
for her saintliness but was not yet
ready to follow her example the youngest
of four children he indulged in childish
pastimes stealing change to buy
cigarettes fearful of his Stern father a
prominent local politician he nervously
confessed to the petty theft
instead of punishing his son he embraced
him for having the courage to say the
truth and to confess and both of them
cried and grandfather lights in his
biography that it was like washing away
the impurities the tears that both of
them shed but when you have this kind of
discipline to love it builds the
humanity within you and I think that's
what happened with God in keeping with
Hindu tradition at age 13
Gandhi was married to a young girl of
the same age initially he was a jealous
and possessive husband at age 16 he
faced his first great conflict between
duty and desire one night while nursing
his sick father he slipped upstairs to
share his wife's bed at this moment his
father died the servant comes to him and
says your father is gone Gandhi says his
first impulse was my god what have I
done
for all of his life he says he refers
back to that incident when he deserted
his father when he did not fulfill his
duty his responsibility to his parent
and that became the basis of much of a
sense of duty and responsibility he is
he must be the son of all society he
must be the diligent and dutiful person
serving humankind at age 17 Gandhi left
his wife and family behind to attend law
school in London immensely shy and naive
he found the bustle of the big city
thoroughly intimidating
he's unaware of things like elevators so
he walks into what he thinks is a room
in Odell and suddenly the room is moving
and he's frightened as it was going up
here he's on an elevator the door is
open and he can't conceive of it for a
time his highest ambition was to become
an English gentleman he sported a top
hat and silver tip Kane took lessons in
dancing
violin and French but no superficial
skill could hide his inexperience and
insecurity even after obtaining a law
degree he doubted his ability to
practice later writing there was no end
to my helplessness and fear he goes to
India takes up his first case and finds
that when in the court of law
he simply is not able to open his mouth
before the judge he froze and he was
deeply distressed Mike humiliated he
began searching for an escaped salvation
came in the form of a job offer from
South Africa as he said it was in that
godforsaken country that I found my god
just days after arriving in his new
country Gandhi experienced an epiphany
unaware of discrimination against
Indians in british-run South Africa he
innocently booked first-class passage on
a train to Pretoria a white passenger
spots him complains to the conductor and
insists that he be placed in a
third-class compartment even though he
has the first-class ticket
Gandhi resists the first major stop
pietermaritzburg he's thrown off the
train and I mean thrown brutally off the
train by the conductor that humiliation
was really what sparked off his desire
for change and he spent the whole night
sitting on the platform wondering how to
get justice Gandhi later described that
long shivering winter night as the most
creative experience of his life he
considered returning to India and
rejected it as an act of cowardice he
considered accepting the discrimination
but everything in him rebelled against
submitting he considered physically
attacking his oppressors and gave that
up as impractical there was only one
choice left to stay and resist the very
next day he boarded another train the
next week he organized a meeting of
Indian immigrants in his 24th year
Gandhi's concerns had grown beyond
himself to encompass a greater cause
this nagging feeling that he had Kadesh
to make here to stay he had to fight for
the rights of his people and eventually
for the rights of all making
now that I think was really the
beginning of the matter we're Mohandas
Gandhi really begins to emerge as a
mass-market great song
[Music]
in the South Africa of the 1890s
Africans and Indians alike endured the
whims of their white masters living
under laws denying them the right to
vote own property or even walk the
streets after dark
dedicated to writing those wrongs Gandhi
was at first woefully naive in the ways
of power politics as a lawyer he
believes that we change the laws we
change human behavior and so from 1893
to 1960 he is bound and determined in
the law courts to do something now the
problem is that the British are smarter
than he is during this time and every
time he changes one law and other laws
put into place
in order to make the discrimination work
in another manner victimized by white
South Africans Gandhi resolved to act as
a unifying force he began developing
communities of people from different
races and religions all brought together
to live as equals he insisted on
treating his own family would soon
included four young sons no differently
than anyone else
despite his abhorrence of British
oppression until 1906 Gandhi considered
himself a faithful member of the Empire
even singing God Save the Queen and
teaching it to his children so loyal in
fact that he served as a stretcher
bearer alongside British troops in the
Boer War in the Zulu uprising of 1906 it
was actually the experiences in Zulu war
which really brought him very close to
inhuman violence because that was when
he realized that this war was not just a
war between two people but it was a real
massacre he recoiled his British Gatling
gun slaughtered Zulus armed with Spears
he saw the pleasure soldiers took in
killing and he collected the shattered
bodies of wounded left to die in agony
he begins to think that the Zulus are
being dominated by the British in this
way
what does domination mean and he thinks
about his own domination in his family
and particularly of his wife he has been
married aged 13 and he has been at times
at what he calls a cruel a jealous a
dominating husband and as his
fascinating mode and of thinking
triggered by the Zulu rebellion seeing
how the British dominating the Zulus he
takes it within himself how am i guilty
of this dominating kind of behavior and
he says I'm guilty of it in my own
marriage in my relationship with
Kasturba within the hindu tradition is
the ideal of a man who has so conquered
his sexuality that he achieves a
childlike innocence only by mastering
his own desires gandhi decided could he
best serve humanity at age 37 he took
the hindu vow of brahmacarya permanent
celibacy so if he was totally pure then
there'd be no impurity no violence no
aggression cloudy
in 1906 he immediately followed his
personal transformation with a stunning
political insight new laws decreed that
all Indians must be registered in
fingerprinted the provisions included
having Indian women stripped for white
police so body marks could be noted on
the registration form incensed 3,000
indians met in johannesburg to plan a
course of action suddenly a Muslim
merchants stands up and he shakes his
fist and he says by God I will go to
prison before I obey this law and Gandhi
hadn't thought of this before had not
thought of going to prison but he knew
instinctively that this was the right
way to go and he gets up and he says we
will take a vow to God that we will go
to prison and we will stay there until
this law is withdrawn
Gandhi's speech sparked off and
historically unprecedented act of mass
civil disobedience following his lead
protesters endured repeated police
beatings bravely accepting their
suffering without retaliation
you realize for the first time in his
life that when human heart is closed you
can't touch the human head there is no
use reasoning with the person whose
heart is from the prejudices if reason
is not enough violence is not good what
do you do and he discovers in South
Africa for the first time the method of
nonviolent resistance you stand up
against your opponent tell him that you
will not give him but he also reassured
him that he will do him no harm
Gandhi coined the term satyagraha a
combination of two sanskrit words
meaning truth and the pursuit earth to
describe his revolutionary concept the
goal of non-violence was as old as human
philosophy Gandhi's insight was to apply
the ideal to practical political
situations Mudman Gandhi field in order
to implement
ginyan non-violence there first in your
own mind the peace or assist route of
reconciliation must develop sin without
that is a how can implement zinging
non-violence in 1913 general yarn Smuts
the english puppet chief in south africa
passed laws decree in hindu and muslim
marriages invalid Gandhi jumped on the
blunder to inspire a wider revolt in
grandfather typically came home one day
and going my grandmother that you are no
longer my wife here my concubine and she
flared up and said what are you talking
about and so he explained that this is
the law and so our marriage is no longer
recognized and we are living together
illegally
traditionally Indian women were
restricted to the home Gandhi attacked
such customs as another form of
oppression and called on women to
shoulder public responsibilities in one
crafty stroke he had helped to
emancipate millions and added a powerful
new tool to his arsenal the marriage
laws touched off a national strike
cause and walked off their jobs general
Smuts relented rescinding the marriage
laws Gandhi had proved that willpower
could overcome brute force eager to
challenge England on his home ground in
strangling under the yoke of imperialism
for two centuries the British had
systematically plundered India's natural
resources deprived of raw material
native industries withered away India
was the largest most populous and most
profitable outpost in the Empire and
they brought in their down to such a
point where we couldn't even manufacture
a little safety pin we didn't have a
capacity to make a little safety pin
that was the state that misled reduced
us over the years of exploitation by
just 100,000 English invaders never in
history had so few ruled so many
from so far away despairing of ever
again in their freedom
Indians collaborated in their own
enslavement providing soldiers and
police to enforce the will of their
white masters Gandhi challenged his
countrymen to resist telling them that
those who behaved like worms
should expect to be trampled on
investment that is like when shall we
learn to rebelled against ourselves we
had become so dependent that we must
learn to rebel against ourselves get rid
of our psychology of dependency of
getting things by bribery rather than
bravery
we can't rebel against the government
unless we first learn to delegate
results time and again British
authorities unwittingly played into
Gandhi's hands by inflaming public
opinion in 1919 he protested oppressive
new laws by inciting a national strike
while he coordinated the rebellion from
Bombay hundreds of miles to the north
two thousand Indians crowded into the
enclosed village square of Amritsar
unknown to them two days earlier General
Reginald Dyer had decreed a ban on mass
meetings without warning Dyer March 50
Indian troops into the square and
ordered them to open fire with rifles
and Gatling guns
for 10 minutes the soldiers cut down the
trapped and terrified crowd killing 379
people and wounding over 1,000 the only
reason they stopped fighting was they
ran out of ammunition he said if he had
more ammunition they were still gone on
firing into the crowd
fighting to kill the people his ambition
was to teach the Indian the lesson that
they cannot defy the British and ghetto
everything dire followed the massacre by
issuing an infamous squalling decree
local Indians had two choices get down
on their bellies and wriggle like worms
or be flogged to death enraged Indians
screamed for vengeance with a population
advantage of four thousand to one they
could have executed the white foreigners
in a matter of days
[Music]
the massacre at Amritsar in 1919
threatened to touch off a bloodbath
between Britons and Indians demanding
revenge
Gandhi stepped in and said no we cannot
be to the British what general Dyer has
been to us we have to show them that we
can rise beyond that kind of hate he
never allowed anybody to consider the
British to be enemies he said they are
not our enemies they are our friends and
they need to be liberated as much as we
need to be liberated over the next three
years
Gandhi transformed the Indian
nationalist cause into a mass movement
he built upon the outrage generated by
Amritsar to unify Hindu and Muslim labor
and merchants and he won the enduring
affection of ordinary Indians by
becoming one of them embracing the same
simple clothes scant food and meager
comforts as the poorest of the poor
to promote self-reliance he exhorted
Indians to wear their traditional simple
white cloth and to spin it themselves
western made clothes were cast off into
giant bonfires as he say foreign cloud
signifies our cultural dependence on the
West and it also implied that we were
indirectly accomplices in our own
enslavement therefore burning fallen
cloth was a way of purging novices
Gandhi insisted on spending one hour
each day personally spinning yarn other
Indian leaders ridiculed the practice in
the midst of a national crisis Gandhi
might be found at his spinning wheel but
he saw the fundamental importance of
connecting with the masses his unique
stature as the champion of all Indians
kept him the unquestioned leader of
India for a quarter century while
inciting open revolt with one hand with
the other he had to prevent his
followers from succumbing to the allure
of bloodshed many times he called off
campaigns when they threatened to become
violent angering friends and colleagues
[Music]
Gandhi is unique because he as a
political leader show that this
nonviolent attitude could work
politically each time he proved that
once she sees the moral high ground
he must not lose it and it could be lost
through an act of violence on the part
of his community the Indians he knew the
political effectiveness of that moral
high-ground but his public duties
carried a high personal price his four
sons often felt neglected and resented
him for his long absences in prison the
oldest car alone rebelled in ways
seemingly designed to inflict pain on
his parents
becoming an alcoholic and a prostitute
from Gandhi's point of view he lost his
son and there were times towards the end
of his life when he said Akari while
he's no longer my son's awful comment
for a father dedicated to non-violence
to make but the personal cost was
tremendous
Gandhi grieved for his son but no
personal concern could deter him from
the mission of freeing 300 million
Indians in 1930 at age 61 he unveiled a
bold new plan to rebel against attacks
many found unjust the British levy on
salt it was illegal for Indians to make
or sell salt that lucrative franchise
was reserved for foreigners to dramatize
the revolt he planned to march 240 miles
to the Arabian Sea and there make salt
his colleagues in the Indian National
Congress begged him to reconsider
convinced that his scheme would fail the
governing British were equally confident
that their old nemesis was courting
ridicule on March 12th he set off with
capture the conscience of the world and
changed the course of history
[Music]
Gandhi's 1930 salt March cover just 10
miles a day allowing interest to build
and giving foreign reporters time to
come to India and cover the spectacle
firsthand so for 24 days passing through
thousands of villages creating an
enormous political field and as soon as
the news spread not only the whole of
India was emotionally and intellectually
engaged but the whole world large number
of American news reporters saying this
is incredible by the time he gets to the
seashore on April 6 there are hundreds
of thousands of Indians with him and
when he reaches down and picks up the
handful of salt and says with this salt
I resist the might of the British Empire
join me in this struggle of right
against might the response was electric
across the country merchants farmers and
housewives openly made and sold salt
[Music]
thousands were jailed including Gandhi
police brutally club protesters further
enraging in unifying the Indian people
Gandhi knew that nonviolent resistance
requires its followers to show their
courage thus appealing to the best in
human nature he had taught Indians to
rebel against their oppressors and
against themselves
under intense international pressure the
Viceroy Lord Irwin released Gandhi and
invited him to negotiate Gandhi went
directly from prison to the Viceroy
palace an honored guest of sorts so they
gave him a glass of warm water which is
what he had asked for and he put it down
on the table and quietly took out
something from his loincloth and the
curious why sir I said what is it he
said your excellency don't tell this to
anybody
it is the salt that I have illegally
manufactured required to put it in water
sturdy thank the next year Gandhi
journeyed to London for a conference on
India's future as always he travelled
third class and performed his daily
disciplines in London he created a
public relations bonanza staying with
the poor in the East End winning
affection wherever he went
children followed him shouting Gandhi
where's your trousers didn't that I love
my own tantrum that's all I wanted
invited to Buckingham Palace for royalty
he was criticized for appearing before
the king and a loincloth the king
replied Gandhi was wearing enough for
both of us
back home in India he spread his message
through daily prayer meetings I am going
to request the father of our nation the
apostle of God and and non-violence to
give us very because it is complete
independence that we want the northward
formation could happen hundreds of
thousands of people it would look sort
of just out of the corner of your eyes
I'm not one person's not gazing at him
absolutely the attention read Gandhi
admitted to the flaw of ego and at times
found mass adoration exhilarating more
often however the constant crush of
disciples was simply overbearing
I recall on many occasions when I was
traveling with him at every station
there would be thousands of people in
the middle of the night shouting long
live Gandhiji Gandhi and they would go
on shouting until the train passed there
that is out all that din was that he
could never sleep he was surrounded by a
loyal entourage who lived according to
his dictates at times he required
celibacy from his married disciples and
in the last years of his life he engaged
in tests of willpower that shocked his
greatest admirers sleeping naked with
young Hindu girls the idea he explained
was to challenge his discipline and
thereby heighten his commitment
[Music]
for Indians he was a near deity for
Imperial Britain the enemy in August
declaring here is a mantra the short one
that I give you it is do or die
we shall be the free India or die in the
attempt the night of Gandhi's 1942 quit
India speech he and the entire Congress
were arrested at 73 and in failing
health for the next two years he would
lead the rebellion from prison in 1944
his wife Kasturba his life companion of
Gandhi was devastated a year later an
exhausted Briton admitted it no longer
had the resources to rule India but the
prospect of Independence brought old
divisions to the fore Hindus and Muslims
long suspicious rivals turned to open
hatred the Muslim minority insisted on a
separate country what became Pakistan
after a lifetime spent unifying people
Gandhi saw his beloved homeland sliced
in two I think it really did break and
it is hard the idea that India would
have to derive it he would sometimes
find impossible solutions because his
heart wanted what's right but the world
went to LA what is right to happen very
often
he kept faith with his principles and
urged others to do the same
even when it slowed negotiations with
the Viceroy Lord Mountbatten he
maintained his longtime discipline of
silence one day each week my father came
really to look upon him as a saint but
he could then mail Vista class parading
to deal with if it was crisis problems
my father asked him to come and have
discussions and it was all desperate I
most mothers expression when Gandhiji
comes into the room with his finger to
his lips
my father says oh no it is not a day of
silence it is on August 14 1947 Indian
celebrated their independence
Gandhi seeing the growing rift between
Hindu and Muslim asked a friend why do
they rejoice I see only rivers of blood
partition immediately brought mass
migrations Hindus fleeing to India
Moslems escaping to Pakistan hundreds of
thousands of refugees marched
desperately without food without water
[Music]
devastated by privation torn by ancient
animosities two great religions erupted
into mutual massacre both sides were
acting as much out of fear as of anger
and I remember standing on the platform
as it pulled in the station and there
was nobody stirring on the train but
there was blood oozing from the doors
and when they opened the doors hey well
it looked like a butcher shop except the
meat had pieces of clothing on them
eventually a half million people would
perish Gandhi's horror the carnage was
heightened by searing guilt he
personally had failed to convert his
people to non-violence
the last time I talked with him I found
him really depressed and he said I can't
see anything around me there is darkness
everywhere
the men are behaving like beasts and he
said no worse than beasts because beasts
don't kill their own and he said I'm
going to go on a hunger strike until the
stops until Hindus and Muslims become
brothers again there was so much anger
among the refugees that there were large
demonstrations saying to hell with
Gandhi let Gandhi die let Gandhi died
out with that the second day there was a
very timid cutter demonstration and the
third day the cutter demonstration got
bigger and the antigone did you
demonstration got smaller and on the
fourth day the same trend continued
until finally the streets were thronged
with people cheering for Gandhi and
after a week Muslims could walk the
streets of Delhi and perfect safety
Gandhi's hunger strike rescued New Delhi
but at the india-pakistan border civil
war raged on he embarked upon a
pilgrimage of peace across his hate torn
land walking barefoot from village to
ravaged village enduring angry mobs
thorns thrown in his path rising at for
each morning to struggle against the
tide of fear and bloodshed
and I think there is not a single in you
whom that not feel ashamed and proud a
shame that he had been so deeply let
down by many of them and proud that from
amongst them in this day is a darkest
brutality sprang a sailor who make them
proud to be an Indian who atoned for
them almost a christ-like figure
[Music]
and that's when God is like when
something that violence and my entire
life he's been defeated and my death
must achieve love my life
faintly and he deliberately went about
unprotected into most trying situations
and even say to one of his associates
that I should die at the hands of a
recession and when I do please remember
that if I accept that bullet
courageously with the name of God on my
legs only then believe that I was a true
Mahatma on January 30th 1948 the 78 year
old Gandhi walked to his daily prayer
meeting in the garden of Birla house in
New Delhi from among the crowd a young
Hindu man emerged bowed to Gandhi and
shot him three times in the instant
before death took him Gandhi murmured
Rama the Indian word for God
the shock was so appalling that I
remember the tears streaming down my
face I don't in met him half a dozen
times but the impact and the magnetism
was so enormous that one really loud
acute personal bereavement as though
ones and father had died and everybody
in India felt the same there was a sea
of people around the house and one of my
strongest memories were seeing unded
Neru standing on the little stone wall
with tears coming down as I as saying
the father of our country is dead and
breaking down in tears the sorrow and
shock of his murder wrenched India from
the grip of madness violence ceased
overnight 1 million people poured into
Delhi for - on the blessing of being
near him
all through that night people came out
on shorts in bullock-cart
from - Raven down cars and buses and on
the train and a sea of humanity far
above the other below man
[Music]
and all massive people the ciaz people
arrived at the promotion round when when
the actual flame was lit I think 3/4 a
million throats cried out Gandhi is
immortal the deadest legacy of the man
is the kindest life ended a life which
was designed to incarnate one single
passion one single principle the density
of modes nonviolent revolution at freed
India in the 50 years since it has
transformed the world as Martin Luther
King later said Christ gave me the
message Gandhi gave me the method
his ashes were taken by a special third
class train to the ocean they're to be
spread upon the waves home for a soul
who never lost his faith in God for man
you
[Music]
in the glitched of death life persists
in the midst of all truth truth purpose
in the midst of darkness light purchased
hence I gather that God is life truth
light he is love he is real good
